[RA2] Networking solution changes (#2121)
cntt-n/CNTT: doc/ref_arch/kubernetes/chapters/chapter04.md

|`ra2.k8s.010`|IPv6DualStack|To support IPv6 and IPv4, the `IPv6DualStack` feature gate must be enabled on various components (requires Kubernetes v1.16 or later). kube-apiserver: `--feature-gates="IPv6DualStack=true"`. kube-controller-manager: `--feature-gates="IPv6DualStack=true" --cluster-cidr=<IPv4 CIDR>,<IPv6 CIDR> --service-cluster-ip-range=<IPv4 CIDR>,<IPv6 CIDR> --node-cidr-mask-size-ipv4 ¦ --node-cidr-mask-size-ipv6` defaults to /24 for IPv4 and /64 for IPv6. kubelet: `--feature-gates="IPv6DualStack=true"`. kube-proxy: `--cluster-cidr=<IPv4 CIDR>,<IPv6 CIDR> --feature-gates="IPv6DualStack=true"`|[req.inf.ntw.04](./chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

> |`ra2.k8s.011`|Anuket profile labels|To clearly identify which worker nodes are compliant with the different profiles defined by Anuket the worker nodes must be labelled according to the following pattern: an `anuket.io/profile/basic` label must be set to `true` on the worker node if it can fullfill the requirements of the [basic profile](../../../ref_model/chapters/chapter04.md#4.2.5) and an `anuket.io/profile/network-intensive` label must be set to `true` on the worker node if it can fullfill the requirements of the [network intensive profile](../../../ref_model/chapters/chapter04.md#4.2.5).|||

Reviewer: @tomkivlin Should the references be to Table 2-3 and 2-4 in Sections "[2.2.3 Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile Requirements](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_arch/kubernetes/chapters/chapter02.md#2.2.3)" and "[2.2.4 Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Profile Requirements](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_arch/kubernetes/chapters/chapter02.md#2.2.4)" as they have RA2 specific information?

Author: Good point - have updated in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/pull/2121/commits/39433224ce604e354a24ef3afaacca6e8df114ae to point at RA2 Chapter 2.

|Ref|Specification|Details|Requirement Trace|
|---|---|---|---|
|`ra2.ntw.001`|Centralised network administration|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must be administered through the Kubernetes API using native Kubernetes API resources and objects, or Custom Resources.|[`req.inf.ntw.03`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|
|`ra2.ntw.002`|Default Pod Network - CNI|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must use a CNI-conformant Network Plugin for the Default Pod Network, as the alternative (kubenet) does not support cross-node networking or Network Policies.|[`req.inf.ntw.08`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`infra.net.cfg.004`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.003`|Multiple connection points|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must support the capability to connect between ONE and FIVE connection points to each Pod, which are additional to the default connection point managed by the default Pod network CNI plugin.|[`e.cap.004`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason for maxing in 5 connection points?

Author: The requirement in RM states up to 6 connection points per Pod, so this is default + 5.

Reviewer 3: Can we change this to "at least 5" instead of artificially restricting the number of connection points?

Author: Done in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/commit/521f47178e3499b65cb9320b1d25dc6a9fe387b8

|`ra2.ntw.004`|Multiple connection points presentation|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must ensure that all additional non-default connection points are requested by Pods using standard Kubernetes resource scheduling mechanisms such as annotations or container resource requests and limits.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|

> |`ra2.ntw.005`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin|The networking solution deployed within the implementation may support the use a multiplexer/meta-plugin.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`req.inf.ntw.07`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`ra2.ntw.005`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin|The networking solution deployed within the implementation may utilise a CNI-conformant multiplexer/meta-plugin.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`req.inf.ntw.07`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|
```

Author: Deliberately written as-was - next requirement (`ra2.ntw.006`) deals with the CNI conformance.

Reviewer: we can still simplify and just use "utilise"

Author: Updated in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/commit/e049b4d6aac1f9ca1e2a1bf58763903eee41fbaa

|`ra2.ntw.006`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin CNI Conformance|If used, the selected multiplexer/meta-plugin must integrate with the Kubernetes control plane via CNI.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`req.inf.ntw.07`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.007`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin CNI Plugins|If used, the selected multiplexer/meta-plugin must support the use of multiple CNI-conformant Network Plugins.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`ra2.ntw.007`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin CNI Plugins|If used, the selected multiplexer/meta-plugin must support the use of any CNI-conformant Network Plugins.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|
```

Author: What's the basis for this (i.e. a requirement in ch2, or other)?  I'm thinking it's essentially unachievable for any multiplexer to support all CNI plugins.  Surely it only needs to support the CNI plugins that are needed for the other requirements (e.g. IPAM, MACVLAN, SR-IOV, DPDK, etc.)?

Reviewer: It should be any CNI plugin and not support only, say, the multiplexer solution approved CNIs

Author: I think it is more appropriate to list the CNI plugins that are needed. Then we can more clearly describe the gaps in ch6. Otherwise we'll need to document a gap for every possible CNI plugin?

> |`ra2.ntw.008`|SR-IOV Device Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a Device Plugin for SR-IOV may be used to configure the SR-IOV devices and advertise them to the `kubelet`.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|

Author: @rgstori rather than changing the verb here, can we add something to the statement.  Right now, SR-IOV could be used in a Kubernetes cluster, the DPAPI not used, but it would still pass a test for this requirement.  How about:
```suggestion
|`ra2.ntw.008`|SR-IOV Device Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads that match the Network Intensive profile and require SR-IOV acceleration, a Device Plugin for SR-IOV must be used to configure the SR-IOV devices and advertise them to the `kubelet`.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|
```

|`ra2.ntw.009`|Multiple connection points with multiplexer/meta-plugin|When a multiplexer/meta-plugin is used, the additional non-default connection points must be managed by a CNI-conformant Network Plugin.|[`req.inf.ntw.08`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`infra.net.cfg.004`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.010`|User plane networking|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a CNI network plugin that supports the use of DPDK, VPP, or SR-IOV must be deployed as part of the networking solution.|[`infra.net.acc.cfg.001`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`ra2.ntw.010`|User plane networking|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, CNI network plugins that support the use of DPDK, VPP, or SR-IOV must be deployed as part of the networking solution.|[`infra.net.acc.cfg.001`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|
```

> |`ra2.ntw.011`|NATless connectivity|When hosting workloads that require source and destination IP addresses to be preserved in the traffic headers, a CNI plugin that exposes the pod IP directly to the external networks (e.g. Calico, MACVLAN or IPVLAN) is required.|[`req.inf.ntw.14`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

Reviewer: Calico is a solution whereas MCVLAN and IPVLAN are technology choices

Author: I'd argue they are well known enough as reference CNI plugins to warrant inclusion (e.g. https://www.cni.dev/plugins/main/macvlan/).

Reviewer: My issue is with listing Calico

Author: Why? They are all open source CNI plugins that can do what the description says.

Reviewer 2: How about `(e.g. Calico, MACVLAN or IPVLAN CNI plugins)`?

Reviewer: @CsatariGergely Yes that works. Thanks

Author: OK- updated in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/pull/2121/commits/1afa44b08815326f666da831151e0d7c9e46f957.

|`ra2.ntw.012`|Optional Device Plugins|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile that require the use of FPGA or other Acceleration Hardware, a Device Plugin for that FPGA or Acceleration Hardware may be used.|[`e.cap.016`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|
|`ra2.ntw.013`|Dual stack CNI|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must use a CNI-conformant Network Plugin that is able to support dual-stack IPv4/IPv6 networking.|[`req.inf.ntw.04`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.012`||||

Reviewer 2: Delete the empty requirements.

Author: Done in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/pull/2121/commits/9340d33ece604a3c39bb59dad4d63f18b6c2cb74

|Ref|Specification|Details|Requirement Trace|
|---|---|---|---|
|`ra2.ntw.001`|Centralised network administration|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must be administered through the Kubernetes API using native Kubernetes API resources and objects, or Custom Resources.|[`req.inf.ntw.03`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|
|`ra2.ntw.002`|Container Network Interface|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must use a CNI-conformant Network Plugin for the Default Pod Network, as the alternative (kubenet) does not support cross-node networking or Network Policies.|[`req.inf.ntw.08`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`infra.net.cfg.004`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.003`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin CNI Conformance|The networking solution deployed within the implementation must support the use a multiplexer/meta-plugin that conforms with the CNI specification.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)<br><br>[`req.inf.ntw.07`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|

Reviewer 3: This looks like it actively blocks NSM which is not implemented through a CNI approach.

We should consider rewording it.

Author: I have re-worded all the requirements in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/pull/2121/commits/82ba2060adaadb5b54aa8c395c02b4d25b74c1ed.  Can you let me know if that fits better please?

Author: @fkautz could you review the updated wording please?

|`ra2.ntw.004`|Multiplexer/meta-plugin CNI Plugins|The selected multiplexer/meta-plugin must support the use of multiple CNI-conformant Network Plugins.|[`req.inf.ntw.06`](chapter02.md#23-kubernetes-architecture-requirements)|
|`ra2.ntw.005`|SR-IOV Device Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a Device Plugin for SR-IOV must be used.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|
|`ra2.ntw.006`|SR-IOV Network Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a CNI-conformant Network Plugin for SR-IOV must be used.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|

> |`ra2.ntw.007`|User plane overlay networking|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a CNI network plugin that supports the use of OVS-DPDK or VPP vSwitches should be deployed as part of the networking solution.|[`infra.net.acc.cfg.001`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

Author: @rgs the original requirement states this is a must for DPDK:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/52716470/102067588-37f3bd80-3df3-11eb-9520-5bd0f4be3778.png)

Reviewer 4: i just noticed that note (3) under infra.net.acc.cfg.001 states:

> this feature is not applicable for Kubernetes based infrastructures due to lack of vSwitch however workloads need access to user space networking solutions.

I'm not sure about it, many CNIs (and NSM) have a dataplane component with a vswitch running.

Realistically, an user of a network intensive CNF would use either SRIOV or a vswitch-based CNI with some sort of acceleration (eg DPDK), but probably not both at the same time. we can reword this as a "must", and the SR-IOV one as a "may" or "should", or viceversa.

Author: yeah makes sense - we should have an issue to update both the RM and the RA2 ch2 (this `infra.net.acc.cfg.001` is sourced in the RM chapter 5).

Reviewer: @rgstori You may have to word it so that they are exclusive -- both can be "must" but the exclusivity would ensure support for only one. Should this be a host (node) level?

Reviewer 4: agreed to have a single "MUST" requirement, that has all 3 options: sriov, dpdk, vpp etc.

Author: @rgstori @pgoyal01 are either of you able to prepare a change to the PR to accommodate this?

Reviewer 4: edited in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/commit/5c28f9fd19328d3452e1a9618be181416f1b8cc1 . the requirement is ra2.ntw.010 now

Reviewer 4: ra2.ntw.008 also mentions sr-iov for network intensive applications, have changed its verb to 'may'

|`ra2.ntw.005`|SR-IOV Device Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a Device Plugin for SR-IOV must be used.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|
|`ra2.ntw.006`|SR-IOV Network Plugin for Network Intensive|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a CNI-conformant Network Plugin for SR-IOV must be used.|[`e.cap.013`](chapter02.md#221-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-capabilities)|
|`ra2.ntw.007`|User plane overlay networking|When hosting workloads matching the Network Intensive profile, a CNI network plugin that supports the use of OVS-DPDK or VPP vSwitches should be deployed as part of the networking solution.|[`infra.net.acc.cfg.001`](chapter02.md#223-cloud-infrastructure-software-profile-requirements)|

> |`ra2.ntw.008`|NATless connectivity|When hosting workloads that require source and destination IP addresses to be preserved in the traffic headers, a CNI plugin that exposes the pod IP directly to the external networks (e.g. MACVLAN or IPVLAN) is required.|*tbd*|

Author: Just wondering if we should add Calico to the list of e.g. plugins?  Given it is often a default.

Reviewer: @tomkivlin BTW, as you know, if we use Calico we do not need a separate IPAM.

Reviewer 4: yes that's fine for me

Author: OK, updated in https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/pull/2121/commits/9ff051c5f71eb6fe2c5366807a6fe23cda0d1670
